---
title: "Goodbye Groningen! Hellow Oxford!"
categories: [BB life]
tags: [Postdoc]

---

It's been a while that I haven't updated my work and life. On 5th of June, I finally defended my thesis and obtained PhD degree. Thank my supervisor Prof. [Rampal S Etienne](https://www.rug.nl/staff/r.s.etienne/) for his teaching in the last 5 years. Thank my co-supervisor Dr. [Sander van Doorn](https://www.rug.nl/staff/g.s.van.doorn/) and all the other commitee members for their help on my work, thesis and the defense. Obtaining the degree was not the end of my acdemic life but a milestone and a new start for the next stage. 

Since then and even earlier in March 2020, I was looking for postdoc positions and jobs in industry. However, I don't know whether it is due to the pandemic or not, instead of offers I got many rejections. It was a tough time period for me. Without boarding on a contract, I have no income but have a family to raise.  I even started to have doubt on myself.  Luckly, my wife found a job, which seems to some extent to solve our finacial crisis. This allows me to focus on searching for opportunities. Eventually, I found some positions that have a good match for my background. Although they were coming up slowly, I did see some possibilities there. I contacted the group leaders and job posters and tried to highlight myself to gain an interview chance. I got some nice replies but finally they rejected me. The worse part of these rejections is that I don't even know why I got rejected and where I could improve myself better. I started to have doubt on myself. Fortunately, I had one last chance.

I encountered this job poster on LinkedIn. One day in July, when I was roaming on LinkedIn I spotted the postdoc poster on theoretical ecology. After several months training, I am able to catch key words without reading through the content. I clicked the link and found it is Prof. [Lindsay Turnbull](https://www.plants.ox.ac.uk/people/lindsay-turnbull)'s group that is looking for a postdoc to do simulation modeling on plant assembly. This is exactly compatible with what I am doing on my third project. So, I saw a fair chance in the research. Immediately, I made the application and sent an email to Prof. Lindsay Turnbull. Very soon, I got reply from Lindsay and we had several back anf forth communications. Finally, I got an interview and succeeded to get the offer. Maybe in the future I will share this experience but now I have to stop and go to pick up my daughter. Yes, this is my life and update now in this gap time. Spending more time with my family and preparing for the future work in Oxford. 